\usepackage{setspace}
\doublespacing
\setlength{\parindent}{2em}

Ben Doan

Living Color Book Review

```
Jablonski, Nina G. Living Color: The Biological and Social Meaning of Skin Color.
Berkly and Los Angeles: University of California Press. 2012
```
It's important to start with a physical description of the mechanisms that cause skin color. The primary driving chemical behind skin color is a pigment called melanin. Melanin is used by the human body to protect itself against environmental damage. There are two types of melanin found in human skin, eumelanin and pheomelanin. Eumelanin is the dominant pigment in human skin, and it is particularly effective at blocking UV radiation from the sun. Eumelanin reduces the production of free radicals when the skin is hit by ultra violet radiation (UVR). Pheomelanin does the opposite and creates free radicals when hit by UVR. Melanin is produced by cells called melanosomes. Humans have the same number of melanosomes regardless of skin darkness, but humans with lighter colored skin have smaller melanosomes. Some people with lightly pigmented skin may produce so little melanin that they are unable to tan. Similarly melanin production decreases as humans age with "on average about 10 to 20 percent [of melanocytes] per decade" (22) dying.

Large swaths of naked skin is a trait that is relatively unique to humans. Most other species on earth have a form of protection over their skin whether its scales, feathers, fur, or thick hair. The reason for this is mostly because of our adaptation for heat dissipation. Lack of hair allows humans to have sweat glands covering our bodies. This allows us to very efficiently and rapidly cool ourselves. It does pose a problem, though, in protecting us from damage. Threats like abrasions and plant irritants were defended against by increasing the thickness of the epidermis, but a thicker epidermis does not protect against UV radiation. This need for UV protection lead to an increase in dark skin pigmentation. More melanin in the skin means that UV radiation is protected against.

As humans moved out of the tropics in Africa, their evolved traits became more and more unsuited for the climate. While UVR levels remained high in the summer months, they dropped to very low levels in the fall and winter. This produced a marked impact on the production of vitamin D. Vitamin D is an important hormone that enables the body's absorption of calcium. Vitamin D is created when UVR hits the surface of the skin. Because of this, humans in higher latitudes can experience large deficiencies of vitamin D. As humans entered the higher latitudes of Europe and Asia, they began to lose their skin pigmentation. The lack of melanin allowed them to create the vitamin D that they needed, but the UVR levels were low enough that they did not need the protection of the melanin.

Over the past 50,000 years humans have dispersed to cover the globe. With new tools like clothing, shelters, and firemaking we were able to move into even the highest latitudes. These new environments brought new challenges with respect to UVR exposure and vitamin D. At latitudes outside of our native Africa, we begin to have trouble collection enough vitamin D to survive. The heavy pigmentation that protected us from the harsh equatorial sun halted our ability to collect needed nutrients. This issue was solved in two ways. First people in the far north started to get more vitamin D from their food. Reindeer meet, fish, and organs all contain high amounts of vitamin D and helped supplement their need. In addition to gathering vitamin D from the environment, people in higher latitudes began to lose their dark skin. This allowed them to collect more vitamin D from their limited exposure to UVR. This transition took time, though, "10,000 to 20,000 years may have been required for human populations to achieve an optimal pigmentation" (53).

In addition to varying with region and with age, skin lightness varies between men and women. Women typically have lighter skin than men. This was initially thought to have been a product of men receiving more sun exposure than women, but even unexposed male skin is darker than female skin. The cause of this difference in skin lightness is thought to result from an increased demand for calcium do to breastfeeding infants.

The shift to areas of the earth unlike those that humans evolved in were the basis for many medical issues. One such medical issue is rickets, a childhood disorder caused by calcium or vitamin D deficiency. The reduced efficacy of the sunlight combined with city living caused widespread vitamin D deficiency. People with darker skin are impacted more heavily by this. Rickets was so common amongst slaves in 1800s America that "doctors in Baltimore, Washington, Memphis, and Richmond were convinced that all young negros had to suffer the disease as a kind of rite of passage" (76). This problem exists even today in higher latitudes, although rickets is no longer common. There are also medical problems that arise from too much sunlight. People with light skin evolved for use in high latitudes are more susceptible to skin cancers, as they do not have adequate protection from UV radiation. Skin cancer accounts for 1/3 of all reported cancers, partially due to the dispersal of people from the climates their skin pigmentation is suited for.

Humans are always looking to group people into visual categories. This trait likely evolved to help us organize into small groups. The concept of races is a natural result of this. Races are groups defined by common skin color and physical, cultural, and behavioral traits. These traits are really fluid and continuous, but it is our nature to organize them into discreet groups. These stereotypes can serve to increase group cohesion, but they can have strong negative effects as well. When told that girls are less naturally good at math than boys, girls perform worse on math tests. Humans are very suggestible, so stereotypes can become self fulfilling prophecies.

This need to group people into distinct racial groups wasn't historically an issue. People lived in small groups and would rarely travel long distance. As people began to travel longer distances, they encountered people with skin colors that were different from their own. Different groups reacted differently to this. The people in ancient Egypt had ideas of class and slavery, but people were not designated by their color. India simple grouping where colors were associated with job. Priests were white because they were more likely to stay indoors and warriors were red because they would have tanned for long periods outdoors. These classifications had less to do with base skin color and more to with how their occupation caused them to tan. Muslims in early Arabia were one of the first major groups to associate skin color with status. This attitude developed as Muslim armies delved deeper into Africa. Africans, with their darker skin were considered to be less developed. This sentiment was further hardened by Zanj rebellion.

Skin color based grouping was further established by the growing importance of the slave trade. From the seventh century onwards, most slaves in the Muslim empire were dark skinned. This was so widespread that the word for darkly pigmented slave came to mean any darkly pigmented person. As European explorers explored the globe, their writings further established dark skinned people as savages or brutes. Despite not actually having traveled there, Marco Polo wrote of the people of Zanzibar as "quite black" (121) and said that "Anyone who saw them in another country would say that they were devils" (121). These types of portrayals were very influential in shaping how Europeans thought of non-whites.

This type of racism was very common in Europe. Immanuel Kant, founder of modern western philosophy, considered blacks to be inferior. He saw races as immutable and governing of a persons traits: "In short, this fellow was quite black from head to foot, a clear proof he was stupid" (135). These beliefs also found support from Christianity. Two stories were thought to be potential explanations of the existence of non-whites: The Mark of Cain and The Curse of Ham. These stories provided loose biblical justification for the belief that non-whites were inferior. The story of Ham was even thought to show how the races came to be. Europeans were descendent from Noah's son Japheth, Asians from Shem, and Africans from Ham. Ham was comdemed by Noah to be a servant of servants, which was used as proof that black people were meant to be slaves.

During the eighteenth century slave labor was booming throughout the new world. Portraying blacks as lesser and uncivilized made it easier to force them into this role. Early on it was possible for black slaves to earn their release by converting to Christianity, but this practice was stopped in 1667 when "legal status was tied to skin color" (145) Skin color began to grow more and more tied to status with even light skinned slaves being thought of as superior to dark skinned slaves.

--

Anthropology is about the study of humanity, and this book delves deeply into

--

I think that this book is well written and I would recommend it to others. The split between biology and society is very effective. It gives the physical background that is necessary to understand the social implications of skin color and race.



--


Many methods have been used historically to gauge the color of skin, including rough color words like yellow, red, black, etc. and charts of colors, but most of these methods have been replaced with the much more accurate measuring methods like reflectometry.